# Bio-printing: Is it the beginning of a new era?
##                                 -Shradha Kedia

3D Bioprinting has emerged as a promising approach for tissue regeneration. Me dical professionals and engineers, 3D print prosthetic hands and surgical tools. Bioprinting has begun to transform the field.
The origination of bioprinting lies back into early 1980s 3d printing when Charles Hull, an American engineer, built the first 3d-printer. The idea was to deposit the successive layers of an acrylic-based photopolymer which was then simultaneously crosslinked by UV light, thus creating a solid 3D object. This 3d printer was capable of printing solid model objects by computer-aided design(CAD). 
The ultimate goal of bioprinting is to replicate functioning tissue and materials, such as organs so that they can be transplanted into human bodies. It utilizes 3d-printing techniques to combine cells, growth factors, and biomaterials to fabricate biomedical parts that maximally imitate natural tissue characteristics. It involves layer by layer deposition of bioinks, consisting of living cells, biomaterials, or active biomolecules, to create tissue-like structures that can be used later in the fields of tissue engineering and medicines. Bioprinters have three major components, firstly the hardware used, secondly the type of bio-ink, and lastly the material it is printed on(biomaterial). There are different types of technology for 3D bioprinting and the three major types of bioprinting are inkjet, laser-assisted, and extrusion printers. Inkjet printers are mainly used in bioprinting for fast and large-scale products.  Printers that utilize lasers provide high-resolution printing; however, these printers are often expensive. Extrusion printers print cells layer-by-layer, just like 3D printing to create 3D constructs.
Though the technology initially had limited applications, it is now widely used in dentistry, prosthetics, and products involving biological components, including human tissues. Although, Scientists are still far from 3D printing the organs as it is unfeasible to connect printed structures to the vascular systems that carry life-sustaining blood and lymph throughout our bodies. To be appreciated they have been successful in printing nonvascularized tissue like certain types of cartilage. They have also been able to produce ceramic and metal scaffolds that support bone tissue by using different types of bioprintable materials, such as gels and certain nanomaterials. Several promising animal studies, some involving cardiac tissue, blood vessels, and skin, suggest that the field is getting closer to its ultimate goal of transplantable organs. Although the goal will be achieved at a steady pace, Scientists at Tel Aviv University still have managed to build a 3D-printed heart, that contains cells, blood vessels, ventricles, and chambers and used cells and biological materials from a human patient.
In the United Kingdom, a team from Swansea University developed a bioprinting process to create an artificial bone matrix, using durable, regenerative biomaterial.
Bioprinting is a novel technology that is providing promising results in the field of tissue engineering and medicines. The choice of each bio-ink component and its concentration can lead to specific biological and mechanical characteristics for the optimal formulation in order to mimic the native tissue. There are further studies going on to reach the ideal bio-ink for every tissue type in order to aid researchers with the same goal. It would be a revolutionary phase if scientists successfully manage to print a working 3D-printed organ that can be transplanted to a human body as that would decrease or may even eliminate the huge number of patients waiting for organs. Bioprinting is definitely a way for signing into a new era where almost all the real organs can be imitated using this not so extraordinary yet brilliant technology.
