# Primes and the Million Dollar Mystery


| Question   | Answer                                                            |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Writer     | Nidhi Sangwan - MCA I year                                      |
| Editor     | Rishabh Poria                                                      |
| Status     | Edited |
| Plagiarism | 0%. [Report](https://github.com/RishPoria/Srijan-2021/blob/main/articles/plagReports/PrimesAndMillionDollarMystery.pdf)|

---

Knowingly or unknowingly, every person encounters prime numbers in their lives, due to their prominence in fields such as Information Security, Quantum Physics and most importantly Mathematics. Prime numbers have been studied for years and many prominent mathematicians have contributed towards the same. The Greek mathematician Euclid proved in his theorem 'The Infinitude of Prime Numbers', that there exist countably infinite primes. He also stated that every number is either a prime or the product of prime numbers, in his Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic. Other theories state that there exist infinitely many pairs of prime numbers which are only two units away from each other. Even after so many theorems and proofs explaining the nature of prime numbers, one of the most important unsolved problems in mathematics is the Riemann hypothesis. It is one of the millennium problems of the Clay Institute, and the person who solves it can win a million dollars.

In the hypothesis, German mathematician Bernhard Riemann concerns the pattern and distribution of prime numbers, which has a strong connection with the Prime Number Theorem in Number Theory. The Prime Number Theorem, which Riemann first tried to prove when he was proposing his hypothesis, states that for large values of x, π(x) is approximately equal to x/ln(x), where π(x) is an approximate value for the number of primes between 0 and the number x. However, no function yet exists that tells the exact location of each prime number on the real line. 

The Riemann hypothesis states that the zeros of the Riemann Zeta function, which is used for investigating properties of prime numbers, exist on a specific line in the complex plane. However, the Riemann Zeta function, being a complex-valued function, makes it difficult to determine these values. At present, almost 100 billion of the infinitely many zeros have been observed, and they all satisfy the Riemann hypothesis. The Riemann Zeta function equates to zero for all negative even numbers known as trivial zeros, but these are not the only zeros. The other ones, known as nontrivial zeros, are the main concern as they exhibit a very compelling pattern, which is the central theme of the Riemann hypothesis. Riemann explained in his 1859 paper that all of the nontrivial zeros of the function lie inside a single region between 0 and 1, on the real axis called the critical strip. He hypothesized that they do not just lie somewhere in the strip, but on a single vertical line whose real part equals to ½; this statement is the Riemann hypothesis. This vertical line, known as the critical line, is located in the centre of the critical strip. Zeros of the Riemann Zeta function yield impressive results concerning prime numbers and related objects in number theory. So if the Riemann hypothesis is proven correct, the exact location of prime numbers can be predicted.

Hundreds of theorems exist whose base is laid down on the assumption that the Riemann hypothesis is true. Consequently, if the Riemann hypothesis is disproved, all of these theorems will collapse, and it would be a disaster for mathematics as we currently understand it. The hypothesis has implications in other fields as well. Research has suggested that the locations of the zeros of the Zeta function might have importance in Quantum Physics. However, the significance of the Riemann hypothesis in the field of information security and encryption pales the same for other fields. Prime factors of a natural number greater than one can be determined by creating factor trees. But for larger numbers, it requires a lot of time and hard work to find each factor until only prime numbers are left, as this can only be accomplished by an algorithm with a runtime complexity of the square root of the input. Trying to factor a number greater than the immense Graham's number would take a lifetime; even supercomputers are not that efficient in the factorization of such large numbers. Modern encryption methods take advantage of this weakness and open up a whole new branch of mathematics and computer science, i.e., Cryptography.

Proof for the Riemann hypothesis can lead mathematicians to obtain easier and optimized methods to locate larger primes. It could have the potential to cease the use current encryption methods. If one already knows where the primes are, then instead of trying every number, one only has to pick the zeros of the Riemann Zeta function. Because of that, many systems that are intended to be secure, such as military-government communications and banking transactions, could potentially no longer be protected. Mathematicians and scientists have worked for years and dedicated their lives to the pursuit of this knowledge, but is it right to pursue something that can negatively impact information security? We are still nowhere close to the proof for the Riemann hypothesis. However, knowing its potential and its effect on modern encryption methods might encourage computer scientists to develop more secure and more advanced encryption algorithms, and reduce the dependency on prime numbers, thereby encouraging further innovation and progress in the field of Network Security.
